[MRG] DOC More details about parallelism (joblib, openMP, MKL...) (#15116)
scikit-learn/scikit-learn: doc/modules/computing.rst

    poorly documented. Please help us by improving our docs and tackle `issue
    14228 <https://github.com/scikit-learn/scikit-learn/issues/14228>`_!

Joblib is able to support both multi-processing and multi-threading. Whether
joblib chooses to spawn a thread or a process depends on the **backend**
that it's using.

Scikit-learn generally relies on the ``loky`` backend, which is joblib's
default backend. Loky is a multi-processing backend. To avoid duplicating
the memory in each process (which isn't reasonable with big datasets),
``loky`` will create a `memmap
<https://docs.scipy.org/doc/numpy/reference/generated/numpy.memmap.html>`_
that all processes can share, when the data is bigger than 1MB.

In some specific cases (when the code that is run in parallel releases the
GIL), scikit-learn will indicate to ``joblib`` that a multi-threading
backend is preferable.

As a user, you may control the backend that joblib will use (regardless of
what scikit-learn recommends) by using a context manager::

    from joblib import parallel_backend

    with parallel_backend('threading', n_jobs=2):
        # Your scikit-learn code here

> Please refer to the `joblib's docs <https://joblib.readthedocs.io/en/latest/>`_

Reviewer: I would use this link https://joblib.readthedocs.io/en/latest/parallel.html#thread-based-parallelism-vs-process-based-parallelism instead of pointing to the whole doc.

for more details.

In practice, whether parallelism is helpful at improving runtime depends on
many factors. It is usually a good idea to experiment rather than assuming
that increasing the number of jobs is always a good thing. In some cases it
can be highly detrimental to performance to run multiple copies of some
estimators or functions in parallel (see oversubscription below).

The nested use of joblib-based parallelism with the same backend will result
in an exception. For example, ``GridSearchCV(OneVsRestClassifier(SVC(),

> n_jobs=2), n_jobs=2)`` won't work.

Reviewer 2: Are you sure about that ? I've just tested that and it worked.

Author: That was from the glossary, I'll remove

OpenMP-based parallelism
........................

OpenMP is used to parallelize code written in Cython or C, relying on
multi-threading exclusively. By default (and unless joblib is trying to
avoid oversubscription), the implementation will use as many threads as
possible.

You can control the exact number of threads that are used via the
``OMP_NUM_THREADS`` environment variable::

    OMP_NUM_THREADS=4 python my_script.py

Parallel Numpy routines from numerical libraries
................................................

Scikit-learn relies heavily on Numpy, which may be configured to use a

> multi-threaded numerical processor library like MKL or OpenBLAS.

Reviewer 2: processor ?

> The number of threads used by the BLAS or MKL libraries can be set via the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The number of threads used by the OpenBLAS or MKL libraries can be set via the
```

``MKL_NUM_THREADS`` and ``OPENBLAS_NUM_THREADS`` environment variables.

Please note that scikit-learn has no direct control over these
implementations. Scikit-learn solely relies on Numpy.

Oversubscription: spawning too many threads
...........................................

It is generally recommended to avoid using significantly more processes or
threads than the number of CPUs on a machine. Over-subscription happens when

> you're trying to spawn too many threads at the same time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
you're trying to run too many threads at the same time.
```

Suppose you have a machine with 4 CPUs. Consider a case where you're running

> a :class:`~GridSearchCV` (parallelized with joblib) with ``n_jobs=8`` over

Reviewer 2: in practice nobody will set `n_jobs=8` on a 4 cpus machine. Maybe replace it with a 8 cpus machine ?

a :class:`~HistGradientBoostingClassifier` (parallelized with OpenMP). Each
instance of :class:`~HistGradientBoostingClassifier` will spawn 4 threads
(since you have 4 cores). That's a total of ``8 * 4 = 32`` threads, which
leads to oversubscription of physical CPU resources and to scheduling
overhead.

Oversubscription can arise in the exact same fashion with parallelized
routines from MKL or OpenBLAS that are nested in joblib calls.

Starting from ``joblib >= 0.14``, when the ``loky`` backend is used (which
is the default), joblib will tell its child **processes** to limit the
number of threads they can use, so as to avoid oversubscription. Back to our
example from above, that means that if the joblib call from
:class:`~GridSearchCV` spawns processes, each process will only be able to

> use 1 thread instead of 4, thus mitigating the oversubscription issue.

Reviewer 2: Is it worth mentioning the general heuristic: max_threads = n_cpus / n_jobs

Note that:

- Manually setting one of the environment variables (``OMP_NUM_THREADS``,
  ``MKL_NUM_THREADS``, or ``OPENBLAS_NUM_THREADS``) will take precedence
  over what joblib tries to do. You can also use a context manager (see

>   joblib docs linked below)

Reviewer 2: You can add that this value will be the max number of threads of these libraries in each process. Meaning total number of threads = n_jobs * (OMP/MKL/OPENBLAS)_NUM_THREADS

        # Your scikit-learn code here

Please refer to the `joblib's docs
<https://joblib.readthedocs.io/en/latest/parallel.html#thread-based-parallelism-vs-process-based-parallelism>`_
for more details.

In practice, whether parallelism is helpful at improving runtime depends on
many factors. It is usually a good idea to experiment rather than assuming
that increasing the number of jobs is always a good thing. In some cases it
can be highly detrimental to performance to run multiple copies of some
estimators or functions in parallel (see oversubscription below).

OpenMP-based parallelism
........................

OpenMP is used to parallelize code written in Cython or C, relying on
multi-threading exclusively. By default (and unless joblib is trying to
avoid oversubscription), the implementation will use as many threads as
possible.

You can control the exact number of threads that are used via the
``OMP_NUM_THREADS`` environment variable::

    OMP_NUM_THREADS=4 python my_script.py

Parallel Numpy routines from numerical libraries
................................................

Scikit-learn relies heavily on Numpy, which may be configured to use a

> multi-threaded numerical library like MKL or OpenBLAS.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
multi-threaded numerical library like MKL, OpenBLAS or BLIS.
```

you missed one :D

  - `Scipy sparse matrix formats documentation <https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/sparse.html>`_

Parallelism, resource management, and configuration
===================================================

.. _parallelism:

Parallelism
-----------

Scikit-learn supports parallel implementations for estimators and other
utilities in two ways:

- via the `joblib <https://joblib.readthedocs.io/en/latest/>`_ library. In
  this case the number of threads or processes can be controlled with the
  ``n_jobs`` parameter.
- via OpenMP, used in C or Cython code.

In addition, some of the numpy routines that are used internally by
scikit-learn may also be parallelized if you rely on specific numerical
libraries such as MKL, OpenBLAS, or BLIS.

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
scikit-learn may also be parallelized if numpy is installed with specific
numerical libraries such as MKL, OpenBLAS or BLIS
```

I find it clearer to say that this mainly depends on the way `numpy` is installed.

We describe these 3 scenarios in the following subsections.

Joblib-based parallelism
........................

> When the underlying implementation uses joblib, the number of jobs that are

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When the underlying implementation uses joblib, the number of workers that are
```

Oversubscription can arise in the exact same fashion with parallelized
routines from MKL, OpenBLAS or BLIS that are nested in joblib calls.

Starting from ``joblib >= 0.14``, when the ``loky`` backend is used (which
is the default), joblib will tell its child **processes** to limit the
number of threads they can use, so as to avoid oversubscription. In practice
the heuristic that joblib uses is to tell the processes to use ``max_threads
= n_cpus // n_jobs``, via their corresponding environment variable. Back to
our example from above, since the joblib backend of :class:`~GridSearchCV`
is ``loky``, each process will only be able to use 1 thread instead of 8,
thus mitigating the oversubscription issue.

Note that:

- Manually setting one of the environment variables (``OMP_NUM_THREADS``,
  ``MKL_NUM_THREADS``, ``OPENBLAS_NUM_THREADS``, or ``BLIS_NUM_THREADS``)
  will take precedence over what joblib tries to do. You can also use a
  context manager (see joblib docs linked below). The total number of thread
  will be ``n_jobs * <LIB>_NUM_THREADS``.
- Joblib is currently unable to avoid oversubscription in a
  multi-threading context. It can only do so with the ``loky`` backend

>   (which spawns processes).

Reviewer 3: Shouldn't we also document the `with parallel_backend('loky', inner_max_num_threads=1):`? This would typically be needed for code run on a cluster with many cores, shared with other user where you don't want to use more than 8 cores:
- You use `OMP_NUM_THREADS=8` to run the main program.
- You set `inner_max_num_threads=1` for you call to parallel code with `n_jobs=8`.

If you do not use the programatic way, you will either need to run `numpy` with only 1 core in the main process or end up using 64 CPU.

Author: Just above we have

> You can also use a
  context manager (see joblib docs linked below).

Would you still prefer to directly document it here?

Reviewer 3: See comment above

Author: thanks, I updated

(since you have 8 CPUs). That's a total of ``8 * 8 = 64`` threads, which
leads to oversubscription of physical CPU resources and to scheduling
overhead.

Oversubscription can arise in the exact same fashion with parallelized
routines from MKL, OpenBLAS or BLIS that are nested in joblib calls.

Starting from ``joblib >= 0.14``, when the ``loky`` backend is used (which
is the default), joblib will tell its child **processes** to limit the
number of threads they can use, so as to avoid oversubscription. In practice
the heuristic that joblib uses is to tell the processes to use ``max_threads
= n_cpus // n_jobs``, via their corresponding environment variable. Back to
our example from above, since the joblib backend of :class:`~GridSearchCV`
is ``loky``, each process will only be able to use 1 thread instead of 8,
thus mitigating the oversubscription issue.

Note that:

- Manually setting one of the environment variables (``OMP_NUM_THREADS``,
  ``MKL_NUM_THREADS``, ``OPENBLAS_NUM_THREADS``, or ``BLIS_NUM_THREADS``)
  will take precedence over what joblib tries to do. You can also use a
  context manager (see joblib docs linked below). The total number of thread

>   will be ``n_jobs * <LIB>_NUM_THREADS``.

Reviewer 3: I agree this is mostly `joblib` documentation. I would maybe change a bit the way it is presented: 
```suggestion
- Manually setting one of the environment variables (``OMP_NUM_THREADS``,
  ``MKL_NUM_THREADS``, ``OPENBLAS_NUM_THREADS``, or ``BLIS_NUM_THREADS``)
  will take precedence over what joblib tries to do. The total number of
  threads will be ``n_jobs * <LIB>_NUM_THREADS``. Note that setting this
  limit will also impact your computations the main process, which will
  only use ``<LIB>_NUM_THREADS. joblib exposes a context manager for
  finer control over the number of threads in its workers (see joblib
  docs linked below). 
```

        # Your scikit-learn code here

Please refer to the `joblib's docs
<https://joblib.readthedocs.io/en/latest/parallel.html#thread-based-parallelism-vs-process-based-parallelism>`_
for more details.

In practice, whether parallelism is helpful at improving runtime depends on
many factors. It is usually a good idea to experiment rather than assuming
that increasing the number of workers is always a good thing. In some cases
it can be highly detrimental to performance to run multiple copies of some
estimators or functions in parallel (see oversubscription below).

OpenMP-based parallelism
........................

OpenMP is used to parallelize code written in Cython or C, relying on
multi-threading exclusively. By default (and unless joblib is trying to
avoid oversubscription), the implementation will use as many threads as
possible.

You can control the exact number of threads that are used via the
``OMP_NUM_THREADS`` environment variable::

    OMP_NUM_THREADS=4 python my_script.py

Parallel Numpy routines from numerical libraries
................................................

Scikit-learn relies heavily on Numpy, which may be configured to use a

> multi-threaded numerical library like MKL, OpenBLAS or BLIS.

Reviewer 4: Scikit-learn relies heavily on NumPy and SciPy which internally call multi-threaded linear algebra
routines implemented in libraries such as MKL, OpenBLAS or BLIS.

Maybe we could be extra helpfule and state something like:

At the time of writing (2019), NumPy and SciPy packages distributed on pypi.org and on the conda-forge channel are linked with OpenBLAS while conda package shipped on the "defaults" channel from anaconda.org are linked by default with MKL.

The number of threads used by the OpenBLAS, MKL or BLIS libraries can be set
via the ``MKL_NUM_THREADS``, ``OPENBLAS_NUM_THREADS``, and
``BLIS_NUM_THREADS`` environment variables.

Please note that scikit-learn has no direct control over these

> implementations. Scikit-learn solely relies on Numpy.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
implementations. Scikit-learn solely relies on NumPy and SciPy..
```

Oversubscription: spawning too many threads
...........................................

It is generally recommended to avoid using significantly more processes or
threads than the number of CPUs on a machine. Over-subscription happens when

> you're trying to run too many threads at the same time.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
a program is running too many threads at the same time.
```

(since you have 8 CPUs). That's a total of ``8 * 8 = 64`` threads, which
leads to oversubscription of physical CPU resources and to scheduling
overhead.

Oversubscription can arise in the exact same fashion with parallelized
routines from MKL, OpenBLAS or BLIS that are nested in joblib calls.

Starting from ``joblib >= 0.14``, when the ``loky`` backend is used (which
is the default), joblib will tell its child **processes** to limit the
number of threads they can use, so as to avoid oversubscription. In practice
the heuristic that joblib uses is to tell the processes to use ``max_threads
= n_cpus // n_jobs``, via their corresponding environment variable. Back to
our example from above, since the joblib backend of :class:`~GridSearchCV`
is ``loky``, each process will only be able to use 1 thread instead of 8,
thus mitigating the oversubscription issue.

Note that:

 - Manually setting one of the environment variables (``OMP_NUM_THREADS``,
   ``MKL_NUM_THREADS``, ``OPENBLAS_NUM_THREADS``, or ``BLIS_NUM_THREADS``)
   will take precedence over what joblib tries to do. The total number of
   threads will be ``n_jobs * <LIB>_NUM_THREADS``. Note that setting this

>    limit will also impact your computations the main process, which will

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   limit will also impact your computations in the main process, which will
```

  - `Scipy sparse matrix formats documentation <https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/sparse.html>`_

Parallelism, resource management, and configuration
===================================================

.. _parallelism:

Parallelism
-----------

Scikit-learn supports parallel implementations in two ways: via the `joblib
<https://joblib.readthedocs.io/en/latest/>`_ library, or via OpenMP (through

> Cython, which allows to release the GIL).

Reviewer 5: OpenMP (in C or Cython code which releases the GIL).

When the underlying implementation uses joblib, the number of jobs that are
spawned in parallel can be controled via the ``n_jobs`` parameter. In most
cases, scikit-learn uses joblib to rely on multi-processing rather than on

> multi-threading.

Author: right, also it seems that the default is now loky which prefers using threads anyway.

@ogrisel @jeremiedbb @tomMoral I think it would be useful to have a description here of what users can expect (threads vs processes) when joblib is used, as well as what it means in terms of memory usage.

Could you propose something? It's always been confusing to me TBH.

> multi-threading.

Reviewer 2: the default is loky. But calling joblib.Parallel with `prefer='threads'` will choose the threading backend, unless the user has specified a backend himself.

```
joblib.Parallel()  # loky (default)

joblib.Parallel(prefer='threads') # threading

with joblib.parallel_backend("loky"):
    joblib.Parallel(prefer="threads")  # loky
```

> multi-threading.

Reviewer 2: in terms of memory usage, process based parallelism will duplicate a lot of things so you should expect an increase of memory usage. But loky mitigate this a bit by memmaping X if it's more than 1MB.

> multi-threading.

Author: Thanks for the feedback. I really think all this should be clearly documented. I'll try to come up with something.

> multi-threading.

Reviewer 3: > loky mitigate this a bit by memmaping X if it's more than 1MB.

The mitigation is for all process-based backends (not only `loky`) for any `numpy` array over 1MB.

> OpenMP is used to parallelize low-level code written in Cython, relying on

Author: we don't use openMP is C code do we??

> OpenMP is used to parallelize low-level code written in Cython, relying on

Reviewer 5: Well OpenBLAS can use OpenMP and it's not Cython code.

Otherwise not yet, but there is nothing preventing us to : https://github.com/scikit-learn/scikit-learn/issues/6245

Might be better to stay general here, otherwise it will likely get outdated soon.

multi-threading exclusively. By default, the implementation will use as many

> threads as possible, while still avoiding over-subscription.

Author: I thought that was just fixed in the new joblib release?

> threads as possible, while still avoiding over-subscription.

Reviewer 2: Only for process based parallelism. It can be done with the threading backend because it's based on environment variables which mkl, openblas, openmp,... read only once, when they're imported.

> threads as possible, while still avoiding over-subscription.

Reviewer 6: For reference, here is the issue regarding using joblib threading and BLAS: https://github.com/scikit-learn/scikit-learn/issues/14979

Over-subsription happens when you're trying to spawn too many threads at the
same time. Consider a case where you're running a grid search (parallelized
with joblib) with ``n_jobs=4`` over a
:class:`~HistGradientBoostingClassifier` (parallelized with OpenMP). If each
instance of :class:`~HistGradientBoostingClassifier` spawns 4 threads,
that's a total of ``4 * 4 = 16`` threads, which might be too much if you

> only have 4 cores. When spawning its 4 child processes, joblib will make

Reviewer 5: maybe "which leads to oversubsription of physical CPU resources and to thread scheduling overhead."

sure to avoid over-subscription by limiting the number of threads that each
:class:`~HistGradientBoostingClassifier` can use.

You can still control the exact number of threads that are used via the
``OMP_NUM_THREADS`` environment variable, or using a ``parallel_backend``
context manager (please refer to `joblib's documentation
<https://joblib.readthedocs.io/en/latest/parallel.html#avoiding-over-subscription-of-cpu-ressources>`_
for details).

.. Note::

>     The protection from over-subscription is available starting from

Reviewer 5: "for process based parallelism"
